CEP XXXX: Defining Package-URLs (PURLs) for conda packages (#159)
conda/ceps: cep-XXXX.md

  unencoded ":" (colon) character; and the lowercase, hex-encoded checksum value.

  The lowercase checksum algorithm name MUST only contain the ASCII lowercase characters `a-z` and
  digits `0-9`.  The recommended way to specify checksum algorithms whose names are commonly
  written with upper case and/or non-alphanumeric characters such as dashes (e.g., "SHA-1",
  "SHA-256") is to simply remove any non-alphanumeric characters in the commonly-written name and
  lowercase the remaining string.

  The lowercase hex-encoded checksum value MUST only contain the ASCII lowercase characters `a-f`
  and digits `0-9`.  The checksum value is explicitly understood to be a hexadecimal value, so
  commonly-used prefixes and postfixes (e.g., "0x" and "_16", respectively) MUST NOT be included as
  part of the checksum value.

  Historically, the conda ecosystem has used the MD5 and SHA-256 algorithms for checksumming
  packages; see, e.g., [CEP 16][CEP16], [CEP 32][CEP32], and [CEP 36][CEP36].  Given this and the
  sub-optimal security properties of MD5, the RECOMMENDED algorithm for the `checksum` qualifier is

>   SHA-256.

Author: Having thought about it for a bit, I'm open to rewriting this `checksum` qualifier specification to only support `MD5`, `SHA256`, and/or [some other finite set of checksum algorithms], mostly so this and other CEPs don't have to think about support PURLs using, e.g., [crc8](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cyclic_redundancy_check) or [xkcd221](https://xkcd.com/221/), as one of their named `checksum` algorithms.

# CEP XXXX - PURLs for conda packages

<table>

> <tr><td> Title </td><td> Package-URLs (PURLs) for conda packages </td>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<tr><td> Title </td><td> Package-URLs (PURLs) for conda packages </td> </tr>
```

<tr><td> Status </td><td> Draft </td></tr>
<tr><td> Author(s) </td><td> Cheng H. Lee &lt;clee@anaconda.com&gt; </td></tr>
<tr><td> Created </td><td> 2026-04-02 </td></tr>
<tr><td> Updated </td><td> 2026-04-02 </td></tr>

> <tr><td> Discussion </td><td> ... </td></tr>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<tr><td> Discussion </td><td> https://github.com/conda/ceps/pull/159 </td></tr>
```

<tr><td> Implementation </td><td> NA </td></tr>
</table>

## Abstract

This CEP describes the Package-URL type definition for conda packages in a way that conforms to
other relevant standards, including other CEPs and ECMA-427.

> ## Motivation

Reviewer: Can we add a practical example here? Something like:

> In other words, this CEP proposes a change so that conda PURLs currently written like `old-example-here` become `new-example-here` instead.

Package URLs (PURLs) provide "a standardized, URL-based syntax that uniquely identifies software
packages, independent of their ecosystem or distribution channel".  Users may want or need to use
PURLs to identify conda packages in various contexts, including but not limited to, software bills
of materials (SBOMs), vulnerability reporting, and cross-ecosystem compatibility.

However, the [existing conda PURL definition][purl-conda-def] fails to properly capture the
multi-stakeholder nature of the conda ecosystem, various commonly-understood concepts within the
ecosystem, and critically, the standards specified in other accepted CEPs.  This CEP seeks to

> address such shortcomings with an ecosystem-approved specification for the conda PURL definition.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
address such shortcomings with an ecosystem-approved specification for the conda PURL definition,
that will be submitted for review to the PURL standard.
```

(or similar wording)

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT",
"RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as
described in BCP 14 ([RFC2119][RFC2119], [RFC8174][RFC8174]) when, and only when, they appear in
all capitals, as shown here.

For the purposes of this CEP, the phrase "existing conda PURL definition" refers to the [commit
a6c97bc version of `types/conda-definition.json`][purl-conda-def], which is canonically available
in the https://github.com/package-url/purl-spec repository.

For the purposes of this CEP, references to sections of [ECMA-427][ECMA427] are relative to the 1st
Edition (December 2025) of that standard.

### ECMA-427 PURL components

ECMA-427 Section 5 ("Package-URL specification") states:

> A PURL is a URL composed of seven components:  
>   scheme:type/namespace/name@version?qualifiers#subpath

For conda PURLs, these seven components are defined as follows:

#### `scheme` component

In accordance with ECMA-427 Section 5.6.1 ("Scheme"), the `scheme` component for a conda PURL is
the ASCII string literal "pkg".  Systems handling conda PURLs SHOULD also follow the other rules

> for the `scheme` component specified in ECMA-427 Section 5.6.1.

Reviewer: Isn't this essentially saying like "No changes in this section. Follow ECMA-427 as is"?

#### `type` component

In accordance with ECMA-427 Section 5.6.2 ("Type"), the canonical form for a conda PURL's `type`
component is the ASCII string literal "conda".  The `type` component MUST be treated as
case-insensitive, and system handling conda PURLs are encouraged to normalize the `type` component

> to its canonical lowercase form, following the behaviors specified in ECMA-427 Section 5.5.

Reviewer: Same here. Isn't this essentially saying like "No changes in this section. Follow ECMA-427 as is".

#### `namespace` component

Roughly speaking, the `namespace` component of a conda PURL corresponds to the path and label name
components of the [channel base URL defined in CEP 26](./cep-0026.md#channel-base-urls) and/or the
concept most users have when using the `channel` configuration option supported by [most]
conda-compatible tools.

For conda PURLs, the ECMA-427 Section 6.5.1 requirement property for the `namespace` component is
optional.  However, the use or non-use of the `namespace` component within a conda PURL MUST
conform to the following rules:

- If the `namespace` component is omitted from a conda PURL, then the `repository_url` qualifier
  MUST be explicitly provided in the PURL, and its value MUST be a valid channel base URL, as
  defined in CEP 26.
- If the `namespace` component is provided, each ECMA-427 Section 5.6.3 `namespace` segment MUST be
  a valid channel base URL path component, as defined in CEP 26.  All other rules for the

>   `namespace` component specified in ECMA-417 Section 5.6.3 apply to conda PURLs, including the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  `namespace` component specified in ECMA-427 Section 5.6.3 apply to conda PURLs, including the
```

Right?

  a valid channel base URL, as defined in CEP 26.
- The string literals "defaults" and "local" MUST NOT be used as the entire value of the
  `namespace` component.  This prohibition exists to minimize potential confusion with the
  reserved, user-configurable [multi-]channel names supported by many conda-compatible clients.
- The final path component of `namespace` SHOULD NOT match any channel subdir name, as this can
  lead to ambiguous PURLs and channel base URLs, as noted in CEP 26.  If platform information is
  needed to properly identify the package(s), then the `subdir` qualifier (defined below) should be
  used instead.

An important implication of these rules is that a valid conda PURL must provide at least one of the
`namespace` component or the `repository_url` qualifier, as a conda PURL that both omits the
`namespace` component _and_ assumes the default value for the `repository_url` qualifier (defined
below) specifies a channel base URL that is insufficient to properly locate the package.

Further, the prohibition on using "defaults" as the `namespace` component value means that PURLs

> for Anaconda-built packages should use "main", "r", or "msys2" for their `namespace` component.

Reviewer: What about https://anaconda.org/main? That was always ambiguous to me.

Author: Currently, `anaconda.org/main` is a mirror of `repo.anaconda.com/pkgs/main`.  There's definitely work we at Anaconda need to do to resolve that ambiguity, but I think for the purposes of this CEP, it's okay to allow use of `main` as the conda PURL namespace component value.

#### `name` component

The `name` component MUST be the [distributable package name](./cep-0026.md#package-names) of the
identified artifact(s), as defined in CEP 26.

Conda PURLs SHOULD NOT be used to identify conda virtual packages since they do not correspond to
any concrete [package] artifact and only exist on the client side.

#### `version` component

The `version` component, when percent decoded, MUST be the package version string, as defined in
[CEP 26](./cep-0026.md#version-strings) and [CEP 33](./cep-0033.md).

The `version` component MUST comply with all character encoding rules specified in ECMA-427 Section
5.4 ("Character Encoding").  In particular, if they are used, the epoch segment delimiter `!`
(exclamation point) and the local version segment delimiter `+` (plus) must be percent encoded as
`%21` and `%2B`, respectively.

For conda PURLs to support the desired level of specificity, the `version` component SHOULD be
treated as an exact equality, with any necessary `.0` padding, when used for package version

> comparisons.  In other words, the `version` component should be be treated as equivalent to a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
comparisons.  In other words, the `version` component SHOULD be treated as equivalent to a
```

> `==version` MatchSpec expression, as described in [CEP 29][matchspec-ver-match].  As an example, a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`==version` MatchSpec expression, as described in [CEP 29][CEP29].  As an example, a
```

`version` component with the value `1.2` should match versions `1.2` and `1.2.0` of the named
package but not versions `1.2.0.1` and `1.2.3`.

If [fuzzy equality][matchspec-ver-match] or other, more complex version matching is needed, the
`version` component SHOULD be omitted and [the `vers` qualifier](#qualifiers-component) used
instead.  The `version` component and `vers` qualifier are mutually exclusive and SHOULD NOT be
used together in a conda PURL; in cases where both the `version` component and `vers` qualifier are

> provided, the `version` component SHALL take precedence.

Reviewer: IMO, the version component MUST be a version literal, end of the story. For anything else, `vers` needs to be used.

#### `qualifiers` component

The following `qualifiers` are defined for conda PURLs:

- `repository_url`: Optional qualifier, with a default value defined in the "`repository` property"
  section of this CEP.  Its value, when combined with any `namespace` component as described in the
  "`namespace` component" section, MUST specify the channel base URL of the identified package(s),
  as defined in CEP 26.
- `build`: Optional qualifier, with no default value.  If provided, its value MUST be the
  [build string](./cep-0026.md#build-strings), as defined in CEP 26, of the identified package(s).

> - `build_number`: Optional qualifier, with no default value.  If provided, its value MUST the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `build_number`: Optional qualifier, with no default value.  If provided, its value MUST be the
```

  [currently-recognized artifact extensions](./cep-0026.md#artifact-extensions) or its versioned
  synonym, as defined in CEP 26.  At the time of this CEP's adoption, the accepted values are
  `tar.bz2` (versioned synonym: `v1`), or `conda` (versioned synonym: `v2`).
- `vers`: Optional qualifier, with no default value.  If provided, its value MUST be a valid
  [Version Range Specifier (VERS)][vers-spec], whose `version-scheme` is `conda`; the specification
  of the `conda` VERS and its relationship to concepts like the [MatchSpec query language][CEP29]
  are considered out of scope for this CEP and will be discussed elsewhere.  This qualifier and the
  `version` component are mutually exclusive and SHOULD NOT be used together; additional details
  about this constraint are provided in the "`version` component" section of this CEP.
- `checksum`:  Optional qualifier, with no default value.  If provided, its value MUST consist of
  one or more checksum specifications, with consecutive checksum specifications separated by a
  single, unencoded ASCII "," (comma) character.  Each checksum specification is defined as the

>   concatenating of the lowercase checksum algorithm name (e.g., "md5", "sha256"); a single,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  concatenation of the lowercase checksum algorithm name (e.g., "md5", "sha256"); a single,
```

interpreted as their BCP 14 equivalents "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", and "MAY", respectively.
Importantly, this means that the entirety of any `repository_url` value, including colons (`:`) and
slashes (`/`), must be percent-encoded in accordance with ECMA-427 Section 5.4.

Since existing CEPs do not define a strict relationship between a package artifact's build string
and build number, this CEP does not require that the `build` and `build_number` qualifiers in a
conda PURL be mutually exclusive.  Further, it does specify which of these two qualifiers takes
precedence in cases where their simultaneous use in a conda PURL creates a conflict.  Producers of
conda PURLs should take care that their use of these qualifiers does not create a conflict, and
consumers of conda PURLs are RECOMMENDED to treat conflicting use of these qualifiers as an invalid
or erroneous PURL.

This CEP explicitly _undefines_ the `channel` qualifier found in the [existing conda PURL
definition][purl-conda-def].  The `channel` qualifier corresponds to a weakly-defined concept not
properly captured in any existing CEP, and its presumed purpose in the existing definition is

> better handled by the combination of the `namspace` component and `repository_url` qualifier, as

Reviewer: ```suggestion
better handled by the combination of the `namespace` component and `repository_url` qualifier, as
```

described in this CEP.  Upon acceptance of this CEP, systems handling conda PURLs SHOULD treat
PURLs containing a `channel` qualifier as invalid.

To avoid the need for potentially complex precedence rules in this CEP, the [commonly-used
qualifiers][purl-quals-guide] `filename` and `download_url` used by other PURL types are explicitly
_not_ defined for conda PURLs.  In other words, the `filename` and `download_url` qualifiers MUST
NOT be accepted when processing conda PURLs.  Should such values be needed to handle a conda PURL,
they should be constructed from the other components and qualifiers defined in this CEP and the
rules defined in CEP 26.

#### `subpath` component

The optional `subpath` component of a conda PURL is used to specify a path within the identified
package(s), subject to the following:

> - The `subpath` component SHALL confirm to all rules specified in ECMA-427 Section 5.6.7

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The `subpath` component SHALL conform to all rules specified in ECMA-427 Section 5.6.7
```

  ("Subpath"), with the key words "shall", "shall not", and "may" in ECMA-427 Section 5.6.7 being
  interpreted as their BCP 14 equivalents "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", and "MAY", respectively.
- The `subpath` component MUST be treated as case-sensitive.
- If the `subpath` component identifies a symbolic link with the package(s), the `subpath`
  component MUST be interpreted as a reference to the symbolic link file itself and _not_ as a
  reference to the target path after the symbolic link has been partially or fully dereferenced.
- When applied to [`tar.bz2`-/`v1`-format packages][CEP35.v1], "relative to the root of the
  package" in ECMA-427 Section 5.6.7 MUST be interpreted as the path to an archive member within
  the package tarball, or equivalently, as a relative path from a root directory into which the
  package tarball was extracted.
- When applied to [`conda`-/`v2`-format packages][CEP35.v2], "relative to the root of the package"
  in ECMA-427 Section 5.6.7 MUST be interpreted as a relative path from a common root directory
  into which both inner archives (i.e., `info-{name}-{version}-{build}.tar.zst` and
  `pkg-{name}-{version}-{build}.tar.zst`) have been extracted.

> - The `subpath` component MUST be interpreted as a reference to a path as it exist in the package

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The `subpath` component MUST be interpreted as a reference to a path as it exists in the package
```

#### `description` property

The ECMA-427 Section 6.3 `description` property of the conda PURL type definition SHALL be
"Conda packages".

#### `repository` property

The ECMA-427 Section 6.4 `repository` property is REQUIRED for conda PURLs.  Its use and
interpretation is defined in the "`namespace` component" and "`qualifier` component" sections.

To maintain compatibility with the default behavior of existing conda-compatible clients, the
default public repository (i.e., `default_repository_url`) for conda packages is SHALL be
"https://conda.anaconda.org".

#### `examples` property

The ECMA-427 Section 6.10 `PURL examples` property of the conda PURL type definition SHALL consist
of the PURLs listed in the "Examples" section of this CEP.

#### `reference_urls` property

The ECMA-427 Section 6.12 `reference_urls` property for the conda PURL type definition SHALL be a
list consisting of:

- The canonical URL of this CEP

Note that ECMA-427 Section 6.12 specifies that the URLs listed in the `reference_urls` PURL type
definition are informative.  However, to ensure standardized implementations, this CEP SHOULD be
treated as normative and not just informative.

> ## Examples

Reviewer: I think we should cover different use cases here:

- Fully identifying a single artifact in a given channel mirror (channel, subdir, name, version, build, repository url)
- Fully identifying a single artifact across several channel mirrors (channel, subdir, name, version, build)
- Identifying one or more artifacts for a given source code release (name, version, channel)
- Identifying one or more artifacts for a given project with a version range (name, vers, channel)
- Identifying all artifacts from a project (name, channel)
- Identifying all artifacts from a name across channels (name). Warn that this may be ambiguous for some names since not all projects are guaranteed to be published under the same name in different channels.

  needed to properly handle [certain types of] `file://`-based channels, especially since it is
  unclear if PURLs are meaningfully useful for such channels.
- The specifications for the `subpath` component may not be fully complete with respect to every
  type of path (i.e., file or directory) that could possibly be included in conda packages.
  Updates to this CEP or additional CEPs may be needed if any gaps are identified in the `subpath`
  component specifications.
- This CEP provides the `repository_url` qualifier that can be used identify a package on a
  _specific_ mirror of a channel.  However, this CEP does _not_ define a way to identify a specific
  package artifact that appears across multiple mirrors; e.g., a single PURL that would
  [simultaneously] identify a conda-forge package hosted on both `conda.anaconda.org/conda-forge`
  and `prefix.dev/conda-forge`.  Supporting such PURLs would require additional work, including
  formalizing the concept of "mirrors" for conda channels and specifying which PURL components or
  qualifiers should be used to identify the set of mirrors for a given packages.  (Due to the

>   fairly portable nature of conda packages, the combination is [shortened] channel name, package

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  fairly portable nature of conda packages, the combination of [shortened] channel name, package
```

for Anaconda-built packages should use "main", "r", or "msys2" for their `namespace` component.

#### `name` component

The `name` component MUST be the [distributable package name](./cep-0026.md#package-names) of the
identified artifact(s), as defined in CEP 26.

Conda PURLs SHOULD NOT be used to identify conda virtual packages since they do not correspond to
any concrete [package] artifact and only exist on the client side.

#### `version` component

The `version` component, when percent decoded, MUST be the package version string, as defined in
[CEP 26](./cep-0026.md#version-strings) and [CEP 33](./cep-0033.md).

The `version` component MUST comply with all character encoding rules specified in ECMA-427 Section
5.4 ("Character Encoding").  In particular, if they are used, the epoch segment delimiter `!`
(exclamation point) and the local version segment delimiter `+` (plus) must be percent encoded as
`%21` and `%2B`, respectively.

For conda PURLs to support the desired level of specificity, the `version` component SHOULD be
treated as an exact equality, with any necessary `.0` padding, when used for package version

> comparisons.  In other words, the `version` component SHOULD be treated as equivalent to a

Reviewer 2: Why are we using SHOULD here? Given the next paragraph, I would make this a MUST since if we don't want exact equality, we have to use the `vers` qualifier and leave off the version.

```suggestion
For conda PURLs to support the desired level of specificity, the `version` component MUST be
treated as an exact equality, with any necessary `.0` padding, when used for package version
comparisons.  In other words, the `version` component MUST be treated as equivalent to a
```

Author: Changed to `MUST` here and in other places.

# CEP XXXX - PURLs for conda packages

<table>
<tr><td> Title </td><td> Package-URLs (PURLs) for conda packages </td></tr>
<tr><td> Status </td><td> Draft </td></tr>
<tr><td> Author(s) </td><td> Cheng H. Lee &lt;clee@anaconda.com&gt; </td></tr>
<tr><td> Created </td><td> 2026-04-02 </td></tr>

> <tr><td> Updated </td><td> 2026-04-08 </td></tr>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<tr><td> Updated </td><td> 2026-08-10 </td></tr>
```

> <tr><td> Discussion </td><td> https://github.com/conda/ceps/pull/159 </td></tr>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<tr><td> Discussion </td><td> https://github.com/conda/ceps/pull/159, https://github.com/package-url/purl-spec/issues/868 </td></tr>
```

<tr><td> Implementation </td><td> NA </td></tr>
</table>

## Abstract

> This CEP describes the Package-URL type definition for conda packages in a way that conforms to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This CEP describes the Package URL type definition for conda packages in a way that conforms to
```

Other instances in the text don't use a dash 🤔

> other relevant standards, including other CEPs and ECMA-427.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
other relevant standards, including other CEPs and [ECMA-427][ECMA427].
```

## Motivation

Package URLs (PURLs) provide "a standardized, URL-based syntax that uniquely identifies software
packages, independent of their ecosystem or distribution channel".  Users may want or need to use
PURLs to identify conda packages in various contexts, including but not limited to, software bills
of materials (SBOMs), vulnerability reporting, and cross-ecosystem compatibility.

> However, the [existing conda PURL definition][purl-conda-def] fails to properly capture the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, the [existing conda PURL definition][purl-conda-def] (as of v1.0.1) fails to properly capture the
```

ecosystem, and critically, the standards specified in other accepted CEPs.  This CEP seeks to
address such shortcomings with an ecosystem-approved specification for the conda PURL definition,
that once approved, will be submitted for review to [the PURL standard][gh-purl-spec].

For an example, this CEP proposes changes to the conda PURL definition so that the PURL for
conda-forge's `zlib=1.3.2=h25fd6f3_2` package, which currently would have to be written
`pkg:conda/zlib@1.3.2?build=h25fd6f3_2&channel=conda-forge&repository_url=https:%2F%2Fconda.anaconda.org`,
could be more succinctly and understandably written as
`pkg:conda/conda-forge/zlib@1.3.2?build=h25fd6f3_2`.
(In fact, a strict reading of the existing conda PURL definition would not allow a conda-forge or
other non-Anaconda channels, as it does not provide for a `repository_url` qualifier.)

## Specification

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT",
"RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as
described in BCP 14 ([RFC2119][RFC2119], [RFC8174][RFC8174]) when, and only when, they appear in
all capitals, as shown here.

> For the purposes of this CEP, the phrase "existing conda PURL definition" refers to the [commit
> a6c97bc version of `types/conda-definition.json`][purl-conda-def], which is canonically available

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the purposes of this CEP, the phrase "existing conda PURL definition" refers to the [v1.0.1 revision of `types/conda-definition.json`][purl-conda-def], which is canonically available
```

Edition (December 2025) of that standard.

### ECMA-427 PURL components

ECMA-427 Clause 5 ("Package-URL specification") states:

> A PURL is a URL composed of seven components:  
>   scheme:type/namespace/name@version?qualifiers#subpath

For conda PURLs, these seven components are defined as follows:

#### `scheme` component

The `scheme` component for a conda PURL is the ASCII string literal "pkg".  Systems processing
conda PURLs MUST follow all of the rules specified in ECMA-427 Clause 5.6.1 ("Scheme"), with the
key word "shall" in ECMA-427 Clause 5.6.1 being interpreted as its BCP 14 equivalent "SHALL".

#### `type` component

The canonical form for conda PURL's `type` component is the ASCII string literal "conda".  Systems
processing conda PURLs MUST follow all of the rules specified in ECMA-427 Clause 5.6.2 ("Type"),
with the key word "shall" in ECMA-427 Clause 5.6.2 being interpreted as its BCP 14 equivalent
"SHALL".  Systems processing conda PURLs are RECOMMENDED to normalize the `type` component to its
canonical lowercase form, following the behaviors specified in ECMA-427 Clause 5.5 ("Case

> folding").

Reviewer: Do we really need to "repeat" the ECMA standard here?

#### `namespace` component

Roughly speaking, the `namespace` component of a conda PURL corresponds to the path and label name
components of the [channel base URL defined in CEP 26](./cep-0026.md#channel-base-urls) and/or the

> concept most users have when using the `channel` configuration option supported by [most]

Reviewer: What is `[most]` linking to?

  reserved, user-configurable [multi-]channel names supported by many conda-compatible clients.
- The final path component of `namespace` SHOULD NOT match any channel subdir name, as this can
  lead to ambiguous PURLs and channel base URLs, as noted in CEP 26.  If platform information is
  needed to properly identify the package(s), then the `subdir` qualifier (defined below) should be
  used instead.  (Note that this rule uses the "SHOULD NOT" rather than "MUST NOT" key words to
  match the language in CEP 26.)

An important implication of these rules is that a valid conda PURL must provide at least one of the
`namespace` component or the `repository_url` qualifier, as a conda PURL that both omits the
`namespace` component _and_ assumes the default value for the `repository_url` qualifier (defined
below) specifies a channel base URL that is insufficient to properly locate the package.

Further, the prohibition on using "defaults" as the `namespace` component value means that PURLs
for Anaconda-built packages must use "main", "r", or "msys2" for their `namespace` component.

#### `name` component

> The `name` component MUST be the [distributable package name](./cep-0026.md#package-names) of the
> identified artifact(s), as defined in CEP 26.
> 
> Conda PURLs MUST NOT be used to identify conda virtual packages since they do not correspond to
> any concrete [package] artifact and only exist on the client side.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `name` component MUST be the [package name](./cep-0026.md#package-names) of the
identified artifact(s), as defined in CEP 26.
```

PURLs do not necessarily need to encode concrete packages. I wouldn't exclude virtual packages from the spec, especially given the pending work at https://github.com/package-url/purl-spec/issues/222.

Reviewer: But namespaces can be empty, right? And in that case they result in an underspecified PURL, but a valid "requirement" as in "any package named like this, no matter where it comes from"

Reviewer: If we allow that, we don't need `*` or the discussion of how that's allowed to mean "any channel" (but channel globstrings are disallowed).

Author: > But namespaces can be empty, right?

As this CEP is currently written, yes, but only if the `repository_url` is supplied and is a valid channel base URL:

> - If the `namespace` component is omitted from a conda PURL, then the `repository_url` qualifier MUST be explicitly provided in the PURL, and its value MUST be a valid channel base URL, as defined in CEP 26.

I guess where I am getting stuck trying to figure out how to write this part of the specification comes from these seemingly conflicting requirements:

* We want "all" combinations of the `repository_url` qualifier and the `namespace` components to form a valid (CEP 26) channel base URL. I think this is especially important because unlike many other package ecosystems, the conda ecosystem doesn't really have a centralized artifact registry, so a means of identifying/locating the registry (i.e., channel) being used is critical.

* We want to `repository_url` qualifier to have a "sensible" default value so conda PURLs are less verbose and look like something the ecosystem is already familiar with (i.e., the `-c ...` argument and `channel::pkg` syntax)

* ECMA-427 explicitly prohibits empty/null namespace segments and empty/null qualifier values.

* We want conda PURLs to be able to support identifying packages that are not attached to a channel (e.g., virtual packages).

* We want conda PURLs to be able to support identifying packages without locating them to a specific channel.

If those ECMA-427 prohibitions did not exist, I would propose something like `pkg:conda//__unix` (empty first namespace segment) or `pkg:conda/__unix?repository_url=` (explicitly empty `repository_url` qualifier) to support the last two "any channel" cases, with a preference for the latter syntax.

I personally don't like the idea of allowing the `namespace` component to be empty _and_ the `repository_url` to be unspecified (and therefore implicitly adopting its default value) as a means to specify "any channel". That's (roughly) what the current PURL specification allows, and in my opinion, makes it really hard to distinguish between a mistakenly underspecified PURL and an intentional attempt to identify a conda package regardless of channel.

Author: @jaimergp: I think this is the only remaining part of the CEP that has major sticking points, but I doubt we'll be able to resolve these issues quickly, especially since it may involve larger conversations with "outside" entities like the PURL spec body.

I do think the rest of this CEP is in good shape and is enough of specification to cover a broad range up to majority of use cases. In the interests of avoiding perfect being the enemy of good, what do you think about the idea of simply removing the prohibition on virtual packages, turning how to handle them and other cases of N≠1 channels into deferred work, and then calling a vote on the this CEP?

#### `version` component

The `version` component, when percent decoded, MUST be the package version string, as defined in
[CEP 26](./cep-0026.md#version-strings) and [CEP 33](./cep-0033.md).

The `version` component MUST comply with all character encoding rules specified in ECMA-427 Section
5.4 ("Character Encoding").  In particular, if they are used, the epoch segment delimiter `!`
(exclamation point) and the local version segment delimiter `+` (plus) must be percent encoded as
`%21` and `%2B`, respectively.

For conda PURLs to support the desired level of specificity, the `version` component MUST be
treated as an exact equality, with any necessary `.0` padding, when used for package version
comparisons.  In other words, the `version` component MUST be treated as equivalent to a
`==version` MatchSpec expression, as described in [CEP 29][matchspec-ver-match].  As an example, a
`version` component with the value `1.2` matches versions `1.2` and `1.2.0` of the named

> package but not versions `1.2.0.1` and `1.2.3`.

Reviewer: Wouldn't it be simpler to say that it must be the version literal (i.e. the value in `index.json`? The version component is not meant to have operators of any kind, so only exact equality applies. For any other version ranges `vers` needs to be used.

Reviewer: I'd argue that a version field cannot be transformed into a matchspec; only a `vers` qualifier can. For PyPI, they don't really go into that detail https://packageurl.org/docs/purl-spec/types/definitions/pypi-definition#version-definition. But yea, it's not very practical 🤔 Fine with leaving the `.0` padding as a possible interpretation / normalization.

Fun fact: you can use as many equal signs as you want 😂 

<img width="581" height="862" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/baa22c3b-b7ef-4106-a315-a1a83e844962" />

> If [fuzzy equality][matchspec-ver-match] or other, more complex version matching is needed, the
> `version` component MUST be omitted and [the `vers` qualifier](#qualifiers-component) used
> instead.  The `version` component and `vers` qualifier are mutually exclusive and MUST NOT be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
XXX. The `version` component and `vers` qualifier are mutually exclusive and MUST NOT be
```

Adjust as needed given the comment above.

- `repository_url`: Optional qualifier, with a default value defined in the "`repository` property"
  section of this CEP.  Its value, when combined with any `namespace` component as described in the
  "`namespace` component" section, MUST specify the channel base URL of the identified package(s),
  as defined in CEP 26.
- `build`: Optional qualifier, with no default value.  If provided, its value MUST be the
  [build string](./cep-0026.md#build-strings), as defined in CEP 26, of the identified package(s).
- `build_number`: Optional qualifier, with no default value.  If provided, its value MUST be the
  [build number](./cep-0034.md#infoindexjson), as defined in CEP 34, of the identified package(s).
- `subdir`: Optional qualifier, with no default value.  If provided, its value MUST be the
  [channel subdir name](./cep-0026.md#subdir-names), as defined in CEP 26, of the identified
  package(s).
- `type`: Optional qualifier, with no default value.  If provided, its value MUST be exactly one of
  [currently-recognized artifact extensions](./cep-0026.md#artifact-extensions) or its versioned
  synonym, as defined in CEP 26.  At the time of this CEP's adoption, the accepted values are

>   `tar.bz2` (versioned synonym: `v1`), or `conda` (versioned synonym: `v2`).

Reviewer: No leading period, correct?

- `vers`: Optional qualifier, with no default value.  If provided, its value MUST be a valid
  [Version Range Specifier (VERS)][vers-spec], whose `version-scheme` is `conda`; the specification
  of the `conda` VERS and its relationship to concepts like the [MatchSpec query language][CEP29]
  are considered out of scope for this CEP and will be discussed elsewhere.  This qualifier and the
  `version` component are mutually exclusive and MUST NOT be used together in a conda PURL; in
  cases where both the `version` component and `vers` qualifier are provided, the corresponding

>   conda PURL MUST be treated as an invalid or erroneous URL.

Reviewer: This is repeated above, not sure if intentional.

- `checksum`:  Optional qualifier, with no default value.  If provided, its value MUST consist of
  one or more checksum specifications, with consecutive checksum specifications separated by a
  single, unencoded ASCII "," (comma) character.  Each checksum specification is defined as the

>   concatenation of the lowercase checksum algorithm name (e.g., "md5", "sha256"); a single,

Reviewer: Do we (or PURL authors) have a list of accepted algorithms?

>   unencoded ":" (colon) character; and the lowercase, hex-encoded checksum value.

Reviewer: How does the colon play with the PURL encoding rules? Don't we need to encode it?

conda PURL be mutually exclusive.  Further, it does specify which of these two qualifiers takes
precedence in cases where their simultaneous use in a conda PURL creates a conflict.  Producers of
conda PURLs must take care that their use of these qualifiers does not create a conflict, and
consumers of conda PURLs are RECOMMENDED to treat conflicting use of these qualifiers as an invalid
or erroneous PURL.

This CEP explicitly _undefines_ the `channel` qualifier found in the [existing conda PURL
definition][purl-conda-def].  The `channel` qualifier corresponds to a weakly-defined concept not
properly captured in any existing CEP, and its presumed purpose in the existing definition is
better handled by the combination of the `namespace` component and `repository_url` qualifier, as
described in this CEP.  Upon acceptance of this CEP, systems handling conda PURLs MUST treat
PURLs containing a `channel` qualifier as invalid.

To avoid the need for potentially complex precedence rules in this CEP, the [commonly-used
qualifiers][purl-quals-guide] `filename` and `download_url` used by other PURL types are explicitly

> _not_ defined for conda PURLs.  In other words, the `filename` and `download_url` qualifiers MUST

Reviewer: Removing download_url is problematic if https://github.com/conda/ceps/pull/151 is ever approved. Shall we leave some space in the specification in case it makes it? And, regardless, we need to consider channels that define `base_url` -- what's their download_url?

Reviewer: That example PURL would need to be interpreted as "the `python-3.15.0-habcdefg.conda` record found in the `conda-forge` channel (subdir missing), with download URL available at given location; validity only checkable if the repodata is consulted for the `url` field"

Which makes me think that we can also add some language in the `url` field CEP to prevent this nonsense (e.g. package name must match or something like that)

Author: Added the `download_url` qualifier.

  pre- or post-link scripts, etc.).

The last three rules are intended to ensure consistent interpretation of the `subpath` component,
regardless of the actual package format and processing system.  Note that these rules imply that
conda PURLs cannot be used to directly identify the `metadata.json` nor the inner `.tar.zst`
archives within `conda`-/`v2`-format packages.

### Other ECMA-427 root object properties

ECMA-427 Clause 6 ("Package-URL Type Definition Schema") specifies other required and optional
properties for a PURL type definition.  For conda PURLs, these properties are defined as follows:

#### `type name` property

The ECMA-427 Clause 6.2 `type name` property of the conda PURL type definition SHALL be "Conda".

#### `description` property

The ECMA-427 Clause 6.3 `description` property of the conda PURL type definition SHALL be
"Conda packages".

#### `repository` property

The ECMA-427 Clause 6.4 `repository` property is REQUIRED for conda PURLs.  Its use and
interpretation is defined in the "`namespace` component" and "`qualifier` component" sections.

To maintain compatibility with the default behavior of existing conda-compatible clients, the

> default public repository (i.e., `default_repository_url`) for conda packages is SHALL be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
default public repository (i.e., `default_repository_url`) for conda packages SHALL be
```

"https://conda.anaconda.org".

#### `examples` property

The ECMA-427 Clause 6.10 `PURL examples` property of the conda PURL type definition SHALL consist
of the PURLs listed in the "Examples" section of this CEP.

#### `reference_urls` property

The ECMA-427 Clause 6.12 `reference_urls` property for the conda PURL type definition SHALL be a
list consisting of:

- The canonical URL of this CEP

Note that ECMA-427 Clause 6.12 specifies that the URLs listed in the `reference_urls` PURL type
definition are informative.  However, to ensure standardized implementations, this CEP MUST be
treated as normative and not just informative.

## Examples

> - `pkg:conda/main/python`: basic usage, identifying [all] `python` packages from Anaconda

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `pkg:conda/main/python`: basic usage, identifying _all_ `python` packages from Anaconda
```

Missing link or emphasis?

- `pkg:conda/conda-forge/python@3.13.12?build=hc97d973_100_cp313&subdir=linux-64`: basic usage,

>   identifying a specific `python` build from conda-forge.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  identifying exactly one specific `python` build from conda-forge.
```

- `pkg:conda/python?repository_url=https%3A%2F%2Frepo.anaconda.com%2Fpkgs%2Fmain`: using the
  `repository_url` qualifier to fully identify the channel base URL
- `pkg:conda/conda-forge/python?repository_url=https%3A%2F%2Fprefix.dev`: using the
  `repository_url` qualifier to identify packages hosted by a conda-forge mirror.

## Backwards Compatibility

This CEP intentionally breaks backwards-compatibility for PURLs based on the [existing conda PURL
definition][purl-conda-def] in the following ways:

- The `default_repository_url` has been changed from `https://repo.anaconda.com` to
  `https://conda.anaconda.org`.
- The requirement property of the `namespace` component has changed from "prohibited" to
  "optional", with additional rules as described above.

> - `channel` is no longer an accepted qualifier for conda PURLs.

Reviewer: Shall we say "forbidden"? It's rejected now, isn't it?

These breaking changes are considered acceptable by the author(s) of this CEP, as the existing
conda PURL definition fails to properly capture existing standards (i.e., CEPs) and commonly-used
patterns in the conda ecosystem.  Among the motivations for these breaking changes:

- Simple PURLs like `pkg:conda/python` and `pkg:conda/python?channel=conda-forge` are accepted
  under the existing conda PURL definition but cannot be used to identify actual package artifacts,
  as that definition's default values produces non-existent URLs.  The existing conda PURL

>   definition effectively requires that _every_ conda PURL explicitly provide a `repository_url`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  definition effectively requires that _every_ conda PURL explicitly provides a `repository_url`
```

  qualifier, possibly combined with a `channel` qualifier in an unspecified way, to produce a URL
  that would correspond to an actual package artifact.
- The prohibition of a `namespace` component in the existing conda PURL definition means
  commonly-used patterns in the conda ecosystem (e.g., `channel::package=version`) cannot be
  translated to "intuitive"-/similar-looking PURLs (e.g., `pkg:conda/channel/package@version`).

>   Coupled with the previously-noted choice of [existing] default values, this creates an unwanted

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Coupled with the previously-noted choice of existing default values, this creates an unwanted
```

- [CEP 26][CEP26]: Identifying Packages and Channels in the conda Ecosystem
- [CEP 33][CEP33]: Version literals and their ordering
- [CEP 34][CEP34]: Contents of conda packages
- [CEP 35][CEP35]: Distributable package artifacts file formats
- [VERS specification][vers-spec]: "VErsion Range Specifier" specification

### Informative References

- [PURL Qualifiers Guidance][purl-quals-guide]
- [CEP 16][CEP16]: Sharded Repodata
- [CEP 29][CEP29]: The `MatchSpec` query language
- [CEP 32][CEP32]: Management and structure of conda environments
- [CEP 36][CEP36]: Package metadata files served by conda channels

<!-- Links -->
[RFC2119]: https://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2119.txt
[RFC8174]: https://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc8174.txt
[ECMA427]: https://ecma-international.org/publications-and-standards/standards/ecma-427/
[CEP16]: ./cep-0016.md
[CEP26]: ./cep-0026.md
[CEP29]: ./cep-0029.md
[CEP32]: ./cep-0032.md
[CEP33]: ./cep-0033.md
[CEP34]: ./cep-0034.md
[CEP35]: ./cep-0035.md
[CEP35.v1]: ./cep-0035.md#tarbz2
[CEP35.v2]: ./cep-0035.md#conda
[CEP36]: ./cep-0036.md
[gh-purl-spec]: https://github.com/package-url/purl-spec
[matchspec-ver-match]: ./cep-0029.md#version-matching

> [purl-conda-def]: https://github.com/package-url/purl-spec/blob/a6c97bcfe5c83985a1da348f73a65c9842c7e354/types/conda-definition.json
> [purl-quals-guide]: https://github.com/package-url/purl-spec/blob/a6c97bcfe5c83985a1da348f73a65c9842c7e354/docs/common-qualifiers.md

Reviewer: Shall we use the v1.0.1 tag, cut last week?

```suggestion
[purl-conda-def]: https://github.com/package-url/purl-spec/blob/v1.0.1/types/conda-definition.json
[purl-quals-guide]: https://github.com/package-url/purl-spec/blob/v1.0.1/docs/specification/common-qualifiers.md
```
